Xtriggers: Doc Fixes (#686)
cylc/cylc-doc: src/user-guide/writing-workflows/external-triggers.rst

Trigger functions are just normal Python functions, with a few special
properties:

- They must:

  - Be defined in a module with the same name as the function, unless
    provided using the ``cylc.xtriggers`` entry point;
  - be compatible with the same Python version that runs the scheduler
    (see :ref:`Requirements` for the latest version specification).

- They can be located either:

  - In ``<workflow-dir>/lib/python/``;
  - Anywhere in your ``$CYLC_PYTHONPATH``;
  - Defined using the ``cylc.xtriggers`` entry point for an installed
    package.

.. seealso::

   :ref:`developing.xtrigger.plugins` for more information on writing
   xtrigger plugins.

- They can take arbitrary positional and keyword arguments
- Workflow and task identity, and cycle point, can be passed to trigger
  functions by using string templates in function arguments (see below)
- Integer, float, boolean, and string arguments will be recognized and
  passed to the function as such
- If a trigger function depends on files or directories (for example)
  that might not exist when the function is first called, just return
  unsatisfied until everything required does exist.

> - The module containing the xtrigger function may also contain a "validate"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The module containing the xtrigger function may also contain a ``validate``
```

  - be compatible with the same Python version that runs the scheduler
    (see :ref:`Requirements` for the latest version specification).

- They can be located either:

  - In ``<workflow-dir>/lib/python/``;
  - Anywhere in your ``$CYLC_PYTHONPATH``;
  - Defined using the ``cylc.xtriggers`` entry point for an installed
    package - see :ref:`developing.xtrigger.plugins`

- They can take arbitrary positional and keyword arguments
  (except ``sequential``, which is reserved - see :ref:`Sequential Xtriggers`)
- Workflow and task identity, and cycle point, can be passed to trigger
  functions by using string templates in function arguments (see below)
- Integer, float, boolean, and string arguments will be recognized and
  passed to the function as such
- If a trigger function depends on files or directories (for example)
  that might not exist when the function is first called, just return
  unsatisfied until everything required does exist.
- The module containing the xtrigger function may also contain a ``validate``
  function taking a single argument, which is a dictionary of all the arguments
  passed to the xtrigger function in ``flow.cylc``. It should raise an

>   exception if validation fails. See :ref:`xrandom.validate` for an example

Reviewer 2: Can just point folks at the source code for this:

(untested)

```suggestion
  exception if validation fails. See :py:mod:`cylc.flow.xtriggers.xrandom` for an example
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../workflows/xtrigger/xrandom/flow.cylc
   :language: cylc

.. _xrandom.validate:

Validation example using xrandom
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> The xrandom xtrigger module might also contain a ``validate`` function.
> 
> This will be run on the inputs to an xtrigger, and should raise
> a ``WorkflowConfigError`` with a meaningful description if a condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``xrandom`` xtrigger module contains a ``validate`` function.

This will be run on the inputs to the xtrigger when calling 
``cylc validate`` or before the workflow starts, and should raise a
:py:exc:`cylc.flow.exceptions.WorkflowConfigError` 
with a meaningful description if a condition
```

is not met.

> .. code-block:: python
> 
>    from cylc.flow.exceptions import WorkflowConfigError
> 
>    def validate(args: List, kwargs: Dict, signature: str) -> None:
>        # Total number of args & kwargs makes sense:
>        totalargs = len(args) + len(kwargs)
>        if totalargs < 1 or totalargs > 4:
>            raise WorkflowConfigError(
>                f'{signature} xtrigger should have between 1 and 4 arguments')
> 
>        # Check whether we have a percentage argument:
>        if not args and not 'percent' in kwargs:
>            raise WorkflowConfigError(
>                f'{signature} xtrigger should have a percentage argument')
> 
>        # Check that percentage is a reasonable value:
>        percentage = args[0] if args else kwargs['percentage']
>        if (
>            not isinstance(percentage, (int, float))
>            or percentage > 100
>            or percentage < 0
>        ):
>            raise WorkflowConfigError(
>                f'{signature} xtrigger percentage argument'
>                f' must be a number between 0 and 100, not {percentage}')
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simplified example looks like this:

.. code-block:: python

   from cylc.flow.exceptions import WorkflowConfigError

   def validate(args: List[str], kwargs: Dict[str, Any], signature: str) -> None:
       # Check that percentage is a reasonable value:
       percentage = args[0] if args else kwargs['percentage']
       if (
           not isinstance(percentage, (int, float))
           or percentage > 100
           or percentage < 0
       ):
           raise WorkflowConfigError(
               f'{signature} xtrigger percentage argument'
               f' must be a number between 0 and 100, not {percentage}')

See below for a link to the full ``validate`` function:

.. autofunction:: cylc.flow.xtriggers.xrandom.validate

.. tip::

   The arguments you call the xtrigger function with are automatically
   validated against the function signature, so you don't necessarily need
   to check for the presence of arguments or their types in the validate
   function. However, you may want to check that the values are of the correct
   type or within a certain range.
```

This will be run on the inputs to the xtrigger when calling
``cylc validate`` or before the workflow starts, and should raise an exception
with a meaningful description if a condition is not met.

A simplified example looks like this:

.. code-block:: python

   from cylc.flow.exceptions import WorkflowConfigError

   def validate(args: Dict[str, Any]) -> None:
       # Check that percentage is a reasonable value:
       percent = args['percent']
       if (
           not isinstance(percent, (float, int))
           or not (0 <= percent <= 100)
       ):
           raise WorkflowConfigError(
               "'percent' should be a float between 0 and 100"
           )

See below for a link to the full ``validate`` function:

.. autofunction:: cylc.flow.xtriggers.xrandom.validate

.. tip::

   The arguments you call the xtrigger function with are automatically
   validated against the function signature, so you don't necessarily need
   to check for the presence of arguments or their types in the validate
   function. However, you may want to check that the values are of the correct
   type or within a certain range.

> 

Author: It's a way of demonstrating how a validation function can work.

- which should be avoided) and has a configurable random chance of
success. The function signature is:

.. automodule:: cylc.flow.xtriggers.xrandom

>    :members: xrandom, validate
>    :member-order: bysource

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :members: xrandom
```

Reviewer: True but it does provide a link to the source so it is not useless IMO

Reviewer: https://github.com/cylc/cylc-flow/pull/6084

Validation example using xrandom
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> The ``xrandom`` xtrigger module contains an example of an xtrigger validation

Reviewer 2: Can use `:py:mod:` to link to the source code?

Author: Already linked using the autodoc?
